---
layout: post
title: We've raised $1.2m to help build RethinkDB
--- 

2010 will be an incredibly exciting year for database technology. The amount of
stored information has long been increasing exponentially, presenting
unprecedented challenges for modern technology companies. Dropping RAM prices
and affordable multicore CPUs have drastically changed the hardware profile of
a typical server machine from what it was only five years ago. The emergence of
solid-state drives is about to revolutionize database systems, enabling new
kinds of applications we can barely envision today.
<!--more-->

The database technology we have been using for over four decades is about to
become obsolete. At RethinkDB, we're redesigning databases from the ground up
to meet modern data management demands, and to take advantage of the latest
advances in hardware. We're working to breathe new life into database
technology, from the low level intricacies of database internals, to high level
data access technology.

To help us build a disruptive database system, we've raised a seed round of
over $1.2 million from a syndicate of some of the best institutional and angel
investors in Silicon Valley. The institutional investors that participated in
this round include Highland Capital Partners, Avalon Ventures, Andreessen
Horowitz, and Charles River Ventures. Our angel investors include Brian Pokorny
from SV Angel, Paul Buchheit, Udi Manber, Steve Chen, and Russ Siegelman.
Database guru, Jeremy Zawodny, has signed on as an advisor to our company.
We're looking forward to working with these amazing people to build a great
product that can solve many of the emerging data management problems.

Over the next eighteen months, we intend to build a world-class team of
software engineers to help create the database of the future. We are looking
for people passionate about algorithms, computer architecture, and solving
challenging problems. If you're interested in building products that will have
huge influence on the software industry for years to come, we'd love to hear
from you!
